Add a NEST documentation style guide (#1986)
nest/nest-simulator: doc/userdoc/contribute/templates_styleguides/styleguide.rst

> The NEST documentation style guide

Reviewer: In my view, templates and style guides are very different types of documents. I would not combine them in one folder.

Author: yes, I tend to agree I will separate them

==================================

.. contents:: On this page, you'll find

>    :local:

Reviewer: This list of contents is very long and unstructured. Can we organise it differently?

Author: I moved content around and changed the headings to try to better separate the sections. It should be checked if it makes sense. I also limited the contents on the right side bar to a depth of 1 level

Why do we have a style guide?
-----------------------------

This style guide was created to provide a single reference point for content
creation in NEST. This helps ensure the NEST user-level documentation remains
clear and consistent. The style choices we make here are meant to follow the
major trends in technical writing for software.

Contribute to the docs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to add or modify documentation, make sure to read through this guide before writing a contribution.

We have templates for :doc:`Python example scripts <pyapi_template>` and the :doc:`PyNEST API docstrings <example_template>`.

You will also need to know how to build the documentation locally on your machine: See
:doc:`../../documentation_workflow/user_documentation_workflow`.

> For additional information, including the Git workflow and making a pull request see :doc:`../index`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information, including the Git workflow and making a pull request see :doc:`../index`.
```

General guidelines about writing for NEST
-----------------------------------------

A few tips on writing documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - Be concise: Use short words and sentences; avoid unnecessary modifiers

Reviewer: This is not rendered as a list, just a sequence of paragraphs. Several items on the list miss the period at the end.

Author: All of these are rendering as lists for me.

- Be consistent: Follow this style guide and relevant templates

- Be specific: Avoid vague language; clarity is key

- Focus your message: Start with what's most important, and keep text relevant
  within given section

- Write for your reader: Try to understand what your reader needs to know;
  include context to what you're saying. Remember that most NEST users are computational neuroscientists,
  including students, not software developers!

- Provide examples: Show, don't tell; if you can use code snippets, screenshots,
  or figures to illustrate a point, do so!

- Avoid terms like "simply", "just", or "easy": your knowledge does not always equal
  your readers.  Don't make your reader feel bad because they "simply" didn't
  understand something.

- Write positively: Use positive language rather than negative language

Remember that the primary purpose of the documentation is to provide
information to NEST users who are looking for it.

Voice
~~~~~~

Voice is *how* we talk to people through writing. The voice encompasses
substance, style, and tone.

Our voice is

> - empathetic: we write thinking of who we are writing for and what their needs

Reviewer: Not rendered as list. Periods missing at end.

Author: Periods added

  are
- relaxed: we write in natural, conversational way rather than an authoritative
  way
- factual: we write in a neutral style avoiding irony, humor, or cultural references

> Use 'you' to indicate the reader and 'we' to indicate yourself (the writer and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use "you" to indicate the reader and "we" to indicate yourself (the writer and
```

possibly the NEST team).

The language we use
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We follow spelling and grammar rules of `American English <https://www.merriam-webster.com/>`_.

The markup language we use is :ref:`reStructuredText <sec-reST_style>`. This includes documentation

> blocks in files written in Python and cpp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blocks in files written in Python and C++.
```

We avoid slang or jargon that is unnecessary or could be confusing to readers.

We do, however, use terminology appropriate to NEST and neuroscience when
specific and exact terms are needed, which is often. But explanations or

> references should be provided for clarity in introductory texts and the glossary.

Reviewer: Add link to glossary.

Author: link added

If you have further questions about style not addressed here, see <<STANDARDIZED STYLE GUIDE>>
or ask on the mailing list.

Active voice
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Prefer the active voice, where the subject acts on object.

If the object needs emphasis rather than subject, use passive voice. But ensure
that you cannot improve the sentence by using the active voice.

.. _sec-reST_style:

reStructuredText markup and formatting
--------------------------------------

reStructuredText is a plain text markup language and parser. It is the default language of the Sphinx documentation
generator, which NEST uses for generating documentation.

reStructuredText uses directives, which are blocks of explicit markup used for math, images, code, admonitions, and much
more. The syntax looks like this ``.. directive-name::``. The directive content follows after a blank line and is indented
relative to the directive start.

In addition to directives, reStructuredText has roles, which insert semantic markup into documents.
Roles look like this ``:role-name:`content```.

> We will only cover a few examples here. You can find more information in the following links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will only cover a few examples here. You can find more information in the following links:
```

> * `reStructuredText User Documentation <https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html#id24>`_

Reviewer: Not rendered as list.

* `Sphinx directives <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html>`_

* `Sphinx roles <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html>`_

.. note::

   reStructuredText is sensitive to indentation and new lines.

   * Directives, headings, labels, and tables should be separated from other text by a new line, excluding directive options.
   * Directive options must be indented to the same level as the directive content.
   * Text in multiline content should stay aligned with the first line.
   * If the output format seems incorrect, double check the spaces and newlines
     of the text.

NumPy style docstrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In PyNEST code, we follow the rules for NumPy style docstrings as
`explained here <https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html>`_.

If you're contributing to the :doc:`PyNEST API <example_template>`, make sure you carefully read the NumPy guide.

Code and code snippets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Code blocks are written using the code-block directive.

Example syntax::

    .. code-block:: cpp

>         int main()
>             {
>               cout << "Hello, World!"; \\
>               return 0;
>             }

Reviewer: Use NEST C++ formatting rules:
```suggestion
        int main()
        {
          std::cout << "Hello, World!";
          return 0;
        }
```

Code is rendered as

    .. code-block:: cpp

>         int main()
>             {
>              cout << "Hello, World!";
>              return 0;
>             }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        int main()
        {
          std::cout << "Hello, World!";
          return 0;
        }
```

For Python examples that show input and output use the following syntax::

   >>> input begins with 3, right-angled brackets

>    output is directly below input without any brackets. A blank line must end the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Output is directly below input without any brackets.
   A blank line must end the example.
```

   :code:`cout << "Hello, World!"`

.. _math_style:

Math equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The input language for mathematics is LaTeX markup. See `Mathematics into Type
<http://www.ams.org/arc/styleguide/mit-2.pdf>`_ for a guide to styling LaTeX math.

For equations that take a whole line (or more), use the math directive::

    .. math::

        f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \hat{f}(\xi) e^{2 \pi i x \xi} \, d\xi.

Output rendered as

    .. math::

        f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \hat{f}(\xi) e^{2 \pi i x \xi} \, d\xi.

If the equation runs over several lines you can use ``\\`` as a separator at the end of each line.
You can also align lines in an equation, using the ``&`` where you want equation aligned::

    .. math::

         (a + b)^2  &=  (a + b)(a + b) \\
                    &=  a^2 + 2ab + b^2

For in-text math, use the math role::

   Now we can see :math:`x=1` for this example.

These will be rendered as

   Now we can see :math:`x=1` for this example.

Admonitions
~~~~~~~~~~~

Admonitions are directives that render as highlighted blocks to draw the reader's attention to a particular point.

Use them sparingly.

Use the admonition

> * "See also" to reference internal or external links (only in cases where the reference should stand out),

Reviewer: Not rendered as list

* "Note" to add additional information that the reader needs to be aware of,

* "Warning" to indicate that something might go wrong without the provided information, and

* "Danger" if the situation may cause severe, possibly irreversible, problems.

If you want a custom admonition use::

   .. admonition:: custom label

         Here is some text

Rendered as

   .. admonition:: custom label

         Here is some text

References
~~~~~~~~~~

For referencing reStructuredText files within the documentation, use the ``:doc:`` role. It requires the relative path to
the file::

   :doc:`path/to/file`

> In this case, the link caption will be the title of the given document.

Reviewer: What is a link caption?

Author: modified wording and added an additional file to better exemplify how these references work

You can specify the text you want to use for the link by doing the following::

   :doc:`custom label <path/file>`

This will be rendered as

   :doc:`Top header of file`

>    :doc:`custom label <file>`

Reviewer: I do not understand this example when looking at it in rendered form.

Author: added an additional file to better exemplify how these references work

For cross-referencing specific section headings, figures, or other arbitrary places within file, use the ``:ref:`` role.

The ``:ref:`` role requires a reference label that looks like this ``.. _ref-label:``. Each reference label must be unique
in the documentation. Separate the reference label from the text it is referecing with a new line::

   .. _my-ref-label:

   Section to cross-reference
   --------------------------

   Some content in this section.
   It includes the cross-referecing role :ref:`my-ref-label`.

To reference figures or arbitrary places in a file, you must include a custom
label in the reference for it to work::

>     :ref:`custom label <my-arbitrary-place-label>`

Reviewer: I don not understand the custom label here. Could you give a proper example?

Author: added

Special links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. attention::

>   The items in this section are still in development and have not been incorporated into nest:master!

Reviewer: I am still not sure what you mean here, especially with the "have not been incorporated into master". Do you want to say that not all documentation in NEST code currently follows these guidelines to the dot, or do you mean that the rules are still subject to change? If the former, shouldn't be put that as a general disclaimer at the top of this document and point the users explicitly to a small number of documents/PyNEST docstrings/... that are fully following these rules already, so they have them as worked examples; and explicitly point out that all else is in some stage of transition and *should not* be consulted as reference for how to do things?

Author: This attention admonition is meant to be removed before this PR is merged - it is meant for anyone looking at the document while in review, and wondering why they have never seen these types of links in the documentation (I see how that is not obvious).
I thought it was important to mention intersphinx, hoverxtooltip and the function links in case there were discussions revolving around these topics with respect to to style guide. And I wasn't sure if they'd be ready for review before this PR was merged. Anything not in master mentioned here, should be removed before this PR is merged imo.

Author: removed admonition

Links to functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To link PyNEST API functions used in-text to the API reference page use the following syntax::

   :py:func:`.Create`

Rendered as

>    :py:func:`.Create`

Reviewer: Does one really need the dot? When do I need the dot?

Author: Yes the dot is necessary to generate the link. I'll add an explanation

Classes, methods etc. can also be linked: ``:py:class:`` ``:py:meth:``.
If you want to explictly show a complete function call, like ``nest.Create("iaf_psc_apha")``, the link cannot be used.

.. note::

   Functions within classes NodeCollection and SynapseCollection require different syntax as follows

   ``:py:func:`~nest.lib.hl_api_types.SynapseCollection.funcname```

>    ``:py:func:`~nest.lib.hl_api_types.NodeCollection.funcname```

Reviewer: Could you explain why?

Author: It turns out I was mistaken as I  assumed get() and set() were functions but they are actually methods. Still, because they are both used in two classes, they have slightly special markup. I added text explaining this.

Links to glossary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To link terms to the glossary page use the HoverXTooltip role :hxt_ref: from Mahdi Enan (INM-6)::

Reviewer: Provide link to extension. Most external readers will not know INM-6.

Author: link added

  :hxt_ref:`E_L`

Links to certain external projects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> With the Sphinx extension 'intersphinx', projects that also use Sphinx/ReadtheDocs can be referenced the same way as

Reviewer: Are hyphens around intersphinx correct? Maybe rather make it a link?

Author: link added

see which projects are currently included along with their unique identifier.

Examples of syntax::

  :doc:`tutorial for nestml <nestml:tutorials>`
  :py:func:`pyNN.utility.get_simulator`

.. note::

   Depending on how a project is documented, you may only be able to use the ``:doc:`` role or the ``:ref:`` role.
   To find out, you need to look into the objects.inv file, which can be obtained with the following code

   ``python -msphinx.ext.intersphinx https://docs.project.org/objects.inv``

   Objects in objects.inv are categorized into different sections.
   The std:label refers to objects that use the ``:ref:`` role. And std:doc refers to objects that use the ``:doc:`` role.

Bibliography style
------------------

The reStructuredText bibliography style is used throughout documentation so links
are autogenerated and a consistent format is used.

For in-text citations, we use the reStructuredText numeric style ``[1]_``.

For example:

    The following example is based on Smith [1]_.
    Sanders et al. [2]_ contains a technically detailed example.

Please ensure your reference follows the following guidelines:

> *  Do not add formatting markup such as italics, bold, or underline.

Reviewer: Not rendered as list.

Author: I'm not sure why this is - the bullets render correctly for me.

*  Use a period after every section of bibliography.
*  Use et al. for references with more than five authors.
*  Put surname before first name for all authors.
*  Do not put commas after surname.
*  Use inital for first name of all authors.
*  Put year, in parentheses, after authors.
*  Write article titles in sentence case.
*  Write the full title of journal.
*  Insert a colon between volume and page-range.
*  Add issue in parentheses after volume (optional).
*  Include a linked DOI, if available.

.. code-block:: none

 References
 -----------

 .. [1] Smith J. and Jones M (2009). Title of cool paper. Journal of
        Awesomeness. 3:7-29. <DOI>

 .. [2] Sander M., et al (2011). Biology of the sauropod dinosaurs: the
        evolution of gigantism. Biological Reviews. 86(1):117-155.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-185X.2010.00137.x

Underlines for headings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ReStructuredText uses several types of underline markers for headings. It's
important that the length of the underline is exactly as long as the words
in the heading.

In general, we try to follow the pattern of

> * First heading: ===

Reviewer: Note rendered as list.

* Second heading: ---
* Third heading: ~~~
* Fourth heading: ^^^

"Double quotes"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We use double quotes for strings in code, for example,  ``nest.Create("iaf_psc_alpha")``. This applies to
reStructuredText files as well as Python and C++ code. This rule is based on PEP 257, which (only) dictates the use of
double quotes in triple quoted strings; for consistency, double quotes are used throughout the codebase.

Double or single quotes should not be used to emphasize important concepts in the text.

\``Double backticks\``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use double backticks for

>   - inline code

Reviewer: Not rendered as list.

  - objects/functions
  - model names
  - NEST-specific vocabulary
  - function calls (e.g., ``nest.Create("iaf_psc_alpha")`` or  (``Create`` )
  - Paths (e.g, You can find the models in ``nest-simulator/pynest/examples``)
  - Key value pairs (``{key: value}``)
  - Variables with assigned values ``x = 10``

\`Single backticks\`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use single backticks for

> - Dictionary keys (if no value is provided)

Reviewer: Note rendered as list.

Roles look like this ``:role-name:`content```.

We will only cover a few examples here. You can find more information in the following links.

* `reStructuredText User Documentation <https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html#id24>`_

* `reStructuredText Primer <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html>`_

* `Sphinx directives <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html>`_

* `Sphinx roles <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html>`_

.. note::

   reStructuredText is sensitive to indentation and new lines.

   * Directives, headings, labels, and tables should be separated from other text by a new line, excluding directive options.
   * Directive options must be indented to the same level as the directive content.
   * Text in multiline content should stay aligned with the first line.
   * If the output format seems incorrect, double check the spaces and newlines
     of the text.

NumPy style docstrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In PyNEST code, we follow the rules for NumPy style docstrings as

> `explained here <https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html>`_.

Reviewer: Should we mention explicitly here that this implies that in PyNEST documentation, one shall only use the sections listed in the NumPy doc guide, in that order, and not use any admonitions? Or at least a sentence explicitly asking documenters to carefully read the NumPy Guide before working on PyNEST docstrings?

Author: Added text

* Surname precedes first name for all authors
* No comma follows surname
* Use initials for first name of authors
* Year follows author(s), in parentheses
* Full stop after every section of bibliography.
* No formatting such as italics, bold, or underline.
* Article titles written in sentence case
* Full title of journal
* Volume, can be optionally followed by issue in parentheses, a colon
  separates volume and page range.
* Include a linked DOI, if available

.. code-block:: none

 References
 -----------

 .. [1] Smith J. and Jones M (2009). Title of cool paper. Journal of
        Awesomeness. 3:7-29. <DOI>

 .. [2] Sander M., et al (2011). Biology of the sauropod dinosaurs: the
        evolution of gigantism. Biological Reviews. 86(1):117-155.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-185X.2010.00137.x

Underlines for headings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ReStructuredText uses several types of underline markers for headings. It's
important that the length of the underline is exactly as long as the words
in the heading.

In general, we try to follow the pattern of

* First heading: ===
* Second heading: ---
* Third heading: ~~~
* Fourth heading: ^^^

"Double quotes"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We use double quotes for strings in code, for example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use double quotes for strings in code, for example ``nest.Create("iaf_psc_alpha")``. This applies to Python as well as C++ code. This rule is based on PEP 257, which (only) dictates the use of double quotes in triple quoted strings; for consistency, double quotes are used throughout the codebase.
```

Author: done
